Our incredible Strictly pros
and judges will help us reminisce.
Here we go — lights, camera, action!
Fab—u—lous!
Strictly: The Best Of Movies...
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel...
Nadhim Zahawi, the government’s
business and industry minister,
a committed Brexiteer who previously
ran an oil company and was
a co—founder of the polling
organisation YouGov.
Labour’s Shadow Secretary for Health
and Social Care since 2016,
one of the very few people
in the Shadow Cabinet to keep
the same job after Keir Starmer
was elected Labour leader,
Jon Ashworth.
John Caudwell, billionaire
businessman and philanthropist,
best known as founder of the mobile
phone company, Phones AU and more
recently for donating half a million
to the Conservatives
at the last election.
Joining us down the line,
writer and journalist Nicci Gerrard,
co—author of a string of bestselling
novels and winner of the Orwell
prize for her work on the care
of people with dementia
and an expert on the transmission
of infectious diseases,
professor of theoretical
epidemiology at the University
of Oxford, Sunetra Gupta.
APPLAUSE.
Good evening and welcome
to my guests here in
the studio and to Nicci
who joins us down the line
from Suffolk and to the virtual
audience, thank you very much
for being part of this
and you are from the Oldham area.
Very good to have you with us
and of course, if you want to join
in the conversation at home,
you can follow us in the usual
way on social media.
So, let us get started,
it is ourfirst programme
after the summer, we are keen
to get going.
Our first question tonight
is from Niall Bowman.
Hello, it has been reported
that there are no coronavirus tests
available in the top ten
hotspots in England.
Is this the world—beating
test operation that
Boris Johnson promised?
Jon Ashworth.
Well, great question
and quite obviously, no,
it is not the world beating testing
and tracing system that we were
promised by the Prime Minister.
Look, testing has become
a complete shambles.
We are in a real mess
and we always warned them,
the Labour Party warned them,
plenty of public health
experts warned them,
that unless they fix testing and put
in place a system of tracing,
which is where, if you
have been in touch
with somebody who has got the virus,
that you are contacted
and you are asked to isolate
yourselves, unless you are putting
on a proper effective system,
the virus will get out of control.
And they did not put in place
an effective system.
The contact tracing element
of test entrees is not
contacting enough people,
so in Oldham, for example,
the call centre that is doing this,
which has been given to Serco,
a company that did not have any
experience of doing this sort
of work, only contacted around 50%
of people and what happens is,
even if people are contacted
and asked to isolate,
that means taking two weeks
off work potentially,
and if you are on a zero—hours
contract and low pay
unscrupulous employer,
you cannot always take two
weeks off work.
By not fixing testing and not fixing
this tracing element of it,
you allow the infections to rise
and what we are now seeing is,
I believe, the virus potentially
getting out of control
and when you lose control
of testing and tracing,
you do not know where the virus
is and you cannot track it.
So if we end up having
further restrictions,
already serious restrictions have
been announced, the rule of six,
in Oldham you have got restrictions,
if we end up having even more severe
restrictions in the coming months,
and the second dangerous spike
in the virus, it is because of this
failure to deal and get testing
and tracing fixed and ministers
should have got in place the extra
testing we needed now.
Everyone said to them,
as go back, as people
are encouraged to go back to work,
as we move into autumn,
whenever there are colds
and snifﬂes and so on,
that they would be more pressure
on the system and ministers did not
increase testing to the levels that
were needed, so it is not well
beaten, it is a shambles and,
you know, the British people have
made great sacrifices
throughout this.
People have not seen their families,
they have not gone to weddings,
they have not even said goodbye
to their loved ones at funerals.
The British people have
honoured their side of the bargain,
the government haven’t.
They were supposed to fix testing
for this winter and I am
afraid they have failed.
John Caudwell.
Well, I think they probably have
failed to give a world—class system,
but I think that somewhat misses
the point altogether,
because, first of all,
I am not a great believer
in testing and tracing.
Why not?
Purely and simply because the virus
takes a while to develop...
To form a positive test. 50
To form a positive test. So you’re
going to be getting negative test
from people who are infected.
By the time you’ve got
a positive test from those
people who are infected,
they have already infected
lots of other people,
without knowing that they have
got the virus.
Even that is not the central point.
The central point is that this virus
was deadly, really deadly in April.
It was killing around
about 18% of people.
If you look at the percentage
of deaths now, there is only .4%
of deaths and of course each one
of those is tragic, but it is .4%
of deaths instead of 18%
and it is the same worldwide.
It is the same in Spain,
it is the same in France.
What that leads you to say is not
worry about test and trace,
let us worry about why has this
virus lost its potency?
But how do you know it is not
going to get worse again?
How do you know that there will not
be any more deaths again,
as we are seen in other countries?
My point is, that there are six
potential reasons why this virus
is not killing people.
We can list them.
Briefly.
One is that young people are getting
tested and that is putting a huge
amount of extra positives
of asymptomatic young
people who are not going
to fall ill from it.
The second point is that
a lot of the people that
were vulnerable have already died.
The rest of the vulnerable people
have been well shielded and well
looked after by society and then
there is the possibility
that the masks that we are wearing
and the distancing that we are doing
is reducing viral loads
and it is not proven,
but the possibility of a reduced
viral load might mean a reduced
illness that the body and the immune
system could cope with and fight
of whereas an increased load won’t.
Would you get rid of
testing altogether?
No, but let me finish the point,
because the most important point
of all is coming up,
which is, has the virus
actually lost its potency?
Now, what I think we should be
doing, the scientists
and the government should be finding
out the waiting between these six
factors, and if it is number six,
which is the virus is losing
its potency, we don’t
really need to worry,
because the deaths will be less
than they were with common flu.
So, we need to understand that.
Would I scrap testing?
No, I wouldn’t, because it has
a place to play in this,
but it is not the be
all and end all.
The be all and end all
is understanding this virus,
understanding the six factors
and then planning the action
according to what we find.
Nicci, I saw you shaking your
head at some of that.
I can’t remember which bits
I was shaking my head at.
I was just going to say, first
of all, in reply to the question,
that I quite often feel
that we are living
through Groundhog Day.
This has been going on for over six
months and every week
or so we are told that testing
is just around the corner.
We are told that there is this kind
of superb system coming our way,
but it is another few weeks
and another few weeks and it
has been six months.
What is more, the hyperbolic
language that is used about testing,
the £100 billion spent
on a moonshot, using a technique
which as far as I know
doesn’t actually exist yet.
It feels like a kind
of flummery and a way ofjust
grandstanding and speaking,
as if speaking something will make
it true and I think most
of the public have ceased believing
these promises and then there
is the first of what is happening
is the farce of what is happening
with testing, where most tests
you cannot get four days.
There is a great backlog,
there are teachers not been able
to teach, there are doctors not
being able to go into hospital,
there are carers being kept away
from the care homes,
most tests, once they have been
done, they do not come
back in under 2A hours.
People are being sent from Oxford
to Aberystwyth or Inverness.
People are being sent to test
centres that don’t actually exist
and it feels quite like a farce
to me and it also feels
that it is a farce that is just
eroding trust in any kind
of competence in this government
and in the meantime,
people are being kept separate
from each other.
I mean, I work for a campaigning
group that once family members to go
back into care homes,
because for six months families have
been kept apart in great anguish
and suffering and damage
and the care homes are waiting
for tests, which they are being
promised and not being given.
Let’s hearfrom some
of our audience, you have
got your hands up, Ian.
Yeah.
It is more to do with the government
contracts awarded to companies
appointed without tenders,
using Covid as an excuse to award
them, it seemed a bit of a rush.
These companies are being paid
millions and they have been seen not
to work much before,
so Ijust think it is going
back further to that.
It is the awarding of
the contracts to these
companies who don’t seem to,
you know, coordinate everything.
0K, Katie.
Yeah, I agree with Nicci.
It is a farce.
And what made me furious today
was whenJacob Rees—Mogg talked
about people carping
about the testing system.
We are not carping here in Oldham
and people on this panel
who are from Oldham,
one of the highest, which has one
of the highest rates in the country,
I tell you why we need those tests,
you know, we need them for our
elderly relatives who are ill,
because we are worrying about them.
We need them for our children,
so they can get back
to their education.
We need them for ourselves
so that we can get back to our work,
to ourjobs and earn a living.
Jacob Rees—Mogg just made me sick
today with pushing the blame
back on to those of us
who are vulnerable.
We need those tests to be able
to get on with our lives.
Nadeem, Jacob Rees—Mogg
saying that people should
stop endlessly carping,
were you happy with his comments?
Well, let me try and
address the question?
Just quickly, because I do want
you to get onto that,
but given that Katie
just mentioned that.
No, of course not.
Was he wrong to say that?
So, let me try and address
the question, Fiona.
Nial, you are right to say
and to challenge on this,
because it is difficult
and challenging.
You know, when we got into this
pandemic, we could only do
about 2000 tests a day
and we are now doing
240,000 tests a day,
but clearly there is more demand.
You’re not testing
240,000 people a day.
240,000 tests a day at the moment.
We plan to increase it to 500,000
by the end of October.
There are 250,000 antigen tests
today, but you are right
to challenge us now,
because we have got
to do even better.
Now, some things have got better,
for example, the average distance
someone has to travel for a test has
come down from 6.4 miles to 5.4
miles, but the in—person test,
where the results are then delivered
within 2A hours has also come down
to 64% today with the data.
I am not sitting here trying to hide
away from the challenges,
we have got to do even better.
Can Ijust pick you up
on that 240,000?
The government’s own figures,
the latest figures are that 81,000
people are being tested every day.
That is the government’s
latest figures.
Not 240,000, 81,000.
The figures I have here with me...
That is the capacity,
81,000 according to the latest
figures from the government
on the 9th of September,
81,000 a day.
Well, the figures that
I have got is 240,000,
that is the latest figures.
The average of people
being tested every day?
The capacity in the system.
We know about the capacity,
but in terms of people being tested,
which is what everyone here is,
if you want a test, the capacity
is kind of irrelevant,
if you cannot get a test,
it does not matter
what the capacity is.
As I said, there
are some challenges.
The 90% of people can get
to a testing facility within 22
miles of where they are at,
but we have to do better
which is why we are increasing
capacity to half a million
by the end of October and of course
Test and Trace will get even better.
It is running at the moment
at just shy of 70%.
360,000 people have been identified
and have isolated through their Test
and Trace system and we continue.
Yesterday, we e—mailed schools
so they can actually get a home
testing kit to each school
and they can go on to a dedicated
portal and order those.
One kit?
No.
Ten tests per school.
No, there is more going
into schools as they need them.
The thing with children, of course,
the vast majority actually
are testing negative,
which is good news.
90%, 99% of schools are back
with 88% attendance,
I think Nicci was talking about how
we are doing with the school system,
so many challenges, and I would not
sit here and claim that this...
World beating.
That it is going exactly
as I would hope to go,
but we are constantly improving
and some incredible people,
incredible scientists,
incredible people in the NHS,
in our hospitals, in our
laboratories, for new laboratories
will come online which will increase
capacity even more.
It’s difficult, but it is the right
thing to do. Nobody is denying if
question -- if
question —— if testing is the right
question -- if testing is the right
thing to do, it is
question —— if testing is the right
thing to do, it is if there is
enough. I
enough. Isit
thing to do, it is if there is
enough. I sit on the committee that
looks at this data every day. We
identify the spikes which is why
with the local leadership, as we
with the [oral leadership, as we
have just
with the local leadership, as we
have just done
havejust done in
with the local leadership, as we
have just done in the north—east and
have just done in the north-east and
by the way, or
have just done in the north—east and
by the way, or the local Labour MPs
by the way, or the [oral labour MPs
have been very
by the way, or the local Labour MPs
have been very supportive this
evening. We have announced the
additional interventions we are
making in the north—east to try and
making in the north-east to try and
control
making in the north—east to try and
control the virus. As you will have
control the vims. As you will have
seen, people in
control the virus. As you will have
seen, people in the north—east, a
seen, people in the north-east, a
lot of people
seen, people in the north—east, a
lot of people are not getting tests
lot of peopla are not getting tests
and peopla
lot of people are not getting tests
and people turned up in Sunderland
and peopla turned up in Sundertand
to a test
and people turned up in Sunderland
to a test site today and nobody was
there to test them. Let’s hear from
the audience. Michael. It looks like
Nadhim is struggling with that
Nadhim is stmggling with that
fantasy
Nadhim is struggling with that
fantasy figure. It’s difficult when
you get these numbers which don’t
their reality to what is happening.
But to respond to the question,
nobody wanted a world beating Track
and Trace system, we wanted an
effective one. Johnson himself
blurted out it will be world
beating. What is happening clearly
beating. what is happening dearty
is that
beating. What is happening clearly
is that the announcement seems to be
better rewarded than the actual
workability of the system itself.
Hello. I believe over 100 schools in
the Greater Manchester area have now
had to close or have had to send
had to dose or have had to send
children
had to close or have had to send
children home in Bubbles because of
coronavims,
coronavirus, positive tests. 50 is
coronavims, positive tests. So is
the view
coronavirus, positive tests. 50 is
the view of the government that herd
immunity is now the best way forward
simply because we can’t cope with
the amount of tests required and we
can’t keep the country in lockdown
forever? Martin. After the way Dido
Harding handled the data breach at
TalkTalk and today saying nobody saw
the demand for tests coming, is her
credibility and the credibility of
the testing system shot and it needs
a drastic rethink? Ben. I was
a drastic rethink? Ben. I wasjust
a drastic rethink? Ben. Iwas just
thinking, going
a drastic rethink? Ben. I wasjust
thinking, going forward into the
winter months, test and traces of
vital component for the nation
puzzlement health and getting the
health service is better prepared.
We don’t want to play catch up and
when ran
when can we be expecting a fully
when ran we be expecting a fully
working Test
when can we be expecting a fully
working Test and Trace, not world
beating but efficient, we
beating but efficient, wejust
working Test and Trace, not world
beating but efficient, we just need
an efficient one? Nadhim, I will
come back to you, but Sunetra, the
original question is, is this a
world beating testing operation is
Boris
BorisJohnson promised? And we have
Boris johnson promised? And we have
heard
BorisJohnson promised? And we have
heard whether it is the right way to
go anyway. It is of history clearly
go anyway. It is of history dearty
not a
go anyway. It is of history clearly
not a world beating
not a world heating system. —— it is
not a world heating system. -- it is
dearty not a
not a world heating system. —— it is
clearly not a world beating
clearly not a world heating system.
dearty not a world heating system.
But the point
clearly not a world heating system.
But the point you made, John, is
But the point you made, john, is
this really
But the point you made, John, is
this really what we want to do? You
just said, Fiona, nobody is arguing
this is the way forward and we must
attest. But I will argue against
that. I think we are all talking to
a particular narrative, a particular
plot, which is that the virus is
this nasty thing which may have
diminished in nastiness, although I
don’t think that’s true. Because
don’t think that’s tme. Because
what I
don’t think that’s true. Because
what I think is the virus was never
really that nasty to begin with. And
how are we are going to deal with
it? The only way we can deal with it
it? The only way we ran deal with it
is by somehow
it? The only way we can deal with it
is by somehow keeping it under
control.
When you say it wasn’t that
nasty to begin with —
16,000 deaths and counting
sounds a pretty nasty
thing to lots of people.
I mean, what I’m saying is that
in relation to flu, or other...
I mean, 0K, what I mean
by "was it a nasty thing?"
is, is it any nastier, or less nasty
now, than it was in April?
And I mean, it depends,
obviously, as you say,
whether we consider something that
could kill 16,000
people to be nasty.
And in relation to other pathogens
that we have around that do kill
a lot of other people.
So, I guess that’s what I meant is —
it is virulent, but it’s not
necessarily any more virulent
than many of the other
pathogens we deal with.
But really, what I wanted to say
was that the reason why this virus
was able to kill so many people
at that stage was because the risk
of being infected among
the vulnerable people was really
very high in April,
and that has diminished.
And you mentioned six factors,
but there’s a seventh factor,
which is that many of us are now
immune to this virus.
So, what we need to do
is really rethink.
Yeah, butjust to answer that point,
I wasn’t bringing the immunity
in because I was talking
about the ratio of deaths to cases,
so that automatically discounts
the immunity factor.
No, it doesn’t, actually,
because what happens
is when a population becomes immune,
the risk of infection goes down.
And so, what we really
want to stop...
But that’s the number of cases.
I was just talking of the ratio
of deaths to cases.
Not the cases per population.
Can Ijustjump in for a second?
Tyra in our audience was saying,
is herd immunity the way to go?
Is that your view, Sunetra?
Um, I’m just saying that there
is this other alternative pathway,
which is to build up herd immunity,
without sacrificing
the vulnerable people.
And...
And I absolutely agree with that.
And I’ve been making the point
from day one that we should have
invested the money into protecting
the aged and the vulnerable
and let everybody else
build up herd immunity.
And if you take the number
of deaths that there
would have been incurred then,
I believe there would have been way
less doing it that way
than what we’re doing cumulatively
by the corona deaths that we’ve got,
the cancer deaths that
we’re going to have,
the stroke deaths that we’re
going to have, the suicides,
the mental illness and
the destruction of the economy.
This is not lives or the economy,
this is lives or lives.
I think we’ve handled it
wrongly from the beginning.
I understand why Boris has done
that, because he’s followed
the rest of the world.
Except for Sweden.
And you can’t really go
against the rest of the world.
Otherwise, you’d be absolutely
pilloried if you got it wrong.
But I do believe we’ve got it wrong.
I do believe we’ve been
doing the wrong thing.
And I do believe we’re doing
the wrong thing now.
And we really need to understand,
how deadly is this virus?
And from the figures I’m seeing,
the virus is not that deadly,
for those six reasons.
And the Government and
the scientists need to understand
the weighting behind those six
reasons, so that we make
the appropriate decisions.
So, are you saying that...
I mean, we’ve got a Professor
of theoretical epidemiology.
Are you saying you know
better than Sunetra?
I didn’t say that, did I?
Well, Sunetra thinks it is more
deadly than you’re saying.
No, I’m agreeing with what she said,
but you don’t have to be a Professor
to read the statistics
and understand the facts.
You just need to have
a degree of intellect.
Nicci, you had your hand
on your head there.
I wasn’t quite sure whether that
meant you approved or disapproved.
I’m a bit baffled
by this conversation.
I mean, it seems to me that clearly,
Covid—19 is deadly.
Clearly, it’s deadly
for people who are vulnerable,
for people who have underlying
health conditions, and for people
who are old and for people
who have dementia.
I’m really unhappy at the idea that
you somehow so shield that section
of society that you almost build
a well within the society,
so there are some people
who are being kind of locked up
in their homes and some people
who are free to go out
into the world and have a nice time.
It seems to me that what we have
to think about is ways of dealing
with the epidemic and then ways
of living alongside
the epidemic, and those things
can be done together.
So, it’s true, Ithink, that
in the name of a national emergency,
lots of things have been done
which I find quite scary.
I was mentioning earlier people
being kept out of care homes
where their relatives are.
People not getting cancer treatment.
Lots of domestic abuse
going on because people are locked
up in tiny little flats.
So, I think we need to have a proper
grown—up conversation
about how to best deal
with a pandemic and how to live
with a pandemic so that,
at the other end of it,
there is notjust the most enormous
legacy of unresolved grief and guilt
and damage and depression.
And we’re not doing either of those
things at the moment.
Let’s keep on this topic,
but I want to take another question.
Anna Wood.
So, not quite two weeks
into the academic year,
I’m aware that local schools
in Bolton are already sending whole
year groups home to quarantine
for two weeks due to one or perhaps
two cases of Covid.
Surely, given the nature of Covid,
this could happen again once these
children return to school
after the two weeks?
I was wondering if there was a less
disruptive way to manage
outbreaks in schools?
And, Anna, you’re a primary school
teacher, aren’t you?
lam, yeah.
So, you’ve heard Nadhim talking
about what he’s intending to do
with schools and what’s been done
for schools so far.
Is that enough?
Do you think that will resolve it,
as far as you’re concerned?
Erm, I think that, erm...
As we are at the moment, everything
seems to be unsure really,
because there are whole year groups
going home and they’ve onlyjust
come back in for a week.
They’ve only had a week in and,
already, they’ve been sent
home for a further two
weeks to quarantine.
So, itjust seems like it’s
a disruption again, after they’ve
already had six months off school.
What, it feels like a revolving
door, you’re saying?
Yeah, itjust keeps
going on and on for us.
And I just think that I’ve
already seen massive gaps
in the learning of the children,
you know, they’ve fallen
behind, and they really
need to be in school.
So, Sunetra, given yourview
of the pandemic and an alternative
way of handling it, what do you say
to someone like Anna?
Well, precisely.
I mean, when I said the disease
wasn’t deadly, what I meant,
of course, was precisely that —
that it’s not deadly in a very large
sector of the population.
So, that presents us
with this workable solution,
whereby we can stop testing them,
let them get on with their lives,
let them go to school and receive
something that is incredibly
valuable to them, which is education
and training, let people keepjobs,
let them feed their children.
Let’s preserve all of these things.
Let the Arts continue, or resume,
and continue to flourish.
We can do all this by
aggressively protecting —
I think maybe shielding is not
the right word — aggressively
protecting those who are indeed
vulnerable to this infection —
which, of course, I apologise,
of course it can be very
deadly in a certain sector
of the population.
The good news is, we know
now who is vulnerable,
to a very large degree.
We know that.
And we also know...
What are the things
we really know in this?
We know who’s vulnerable and we know
about the enormous costs
of some of these measures.
How can we balance these?
We can balance these
by using our tests to find creative
solutions to protect the vulnerable,
notjust shield them and shut them
up and box them away,
but ways of protecting them
by testing people who they’ll be
in contact with and making sure
that they won’t pass the virus
on to them.
By creating the conditions whereby
they are at a low risk
of contracting this virus,
which has not diminished
in its potency, but is currently
now held at low risk.
But we cannot hold it
at low risk forever,
without paying these extreme costs.
So...
I absolutely agree
with what you’re saying.
I just wondered why you think,
or know, that the virus
is not losing its potency?
Well, because it doesn’t
mutate very quickly.
It doesn’t change much.
There is no...
I mean, we don’t know anything
for certain about this virus,
but it hasn’t really changed in ways
that would biologically suggest
that it has become less virulent.
But what has happened is that levels
of infection have declined
considerably since April,
and the way people die
is when those infections leak
into the vulnerable sector.
Yeah.
So, that’s what we need to stop.
Jon Ashworth, are you persuaded
at all by what you’ve been hearing?
No, not really.
I mean, I fully respect what you’re
saying, quite obviously, and I’m
very aware of your background
in this field.
Although there are other
epidemiologists who take
a slightly different view
to you, of course.
And you are quite right
that the numbers of deaths
have been coming down.
That is something
we should celebrate.
But it is a virus that spreads
with speed and severity.
And we also know that there
are increasing numbers of people
in younger age brackets who have
caught the virus.
And, yes, they may not have been
admitted to intensive
care in a hospital,
but they are suffering
from debilitating long—term
conditions as a result of the virus.
Now, obviously...
But that’s true of many viruses.
Sorry?
Well, it’s very true, but it’s not
very pleasant to get it.
It’s not very pleasant
for the people who’ve got it.
Because it’s a multi—organ
virus, isn’t it?
That’s also true of flu.
Sorry?
Fine, let everybody
get it and just...
You know, that is not,
if I may say so...
Why would everybody get it?
If I may say so, I do not believe
allowing people to be exposed
to a virus that we know is deadly
or creates serious long—term health
problems for them is the right,
is the rightjudgment.
Then why don’t you
shut down for flu?
..is not the rightjudgment for us
to make as policymakers.
We are trying to protect people,
to save lives and to drive down
infections as best we can.
But the way in which we do
that is by investing
properly in a decent testing
and tracing system.
We do not have decent testing
and tracing at the moment.
Which is why we’ve got hundreds
of schoolchildren starting
this
school term in the same way
they ended the last school term —
at home and not in education.
All right.
Let...
Let me just make this point,
because I just think you’re
on a party political broadcast.
You know, you’ve listened
to what I’ve said, you’ve listened
to what an expert said and you’ve
dismissed it completely
because you want to nail
the Government on Test and Trace.
No, I want to save lives.
And that’s not fair.
I want to save lives, actually.
No, you don’t want to save lives.
I do actually want
to save lives, John.
You just want to let the virus rip
through the population.
No, absolutely not.
We’re killing people with cancer.
We’re killing young people
with cancer to protect young people
who won’t die of this virus.
We absolutely need to protect
the aged and the infirm.
I’ve been saying
that for six months.
We have to...
Whether we call it shielding
or what sort of protection,
we have to protect them to the nth
degree and let everybody else
carry on with the work,
and there will be less deaths
overall, I have no doubt whatsoever.
But you won’t even listen
to what we’re saying.
I disagree.
..Because you want to push your
party political broadcast...
I respectfully disagree with you.
No, let me finish.
..that the Conservative Party
are failing miserably.
Well, they have.
They are failing on testing,
you said that as well.
Yeah, I’m not disagreeing
with that, but what I don’t
like is the fact that...
Well, why are you criticising me
when I make the same
point that you make?
What I don’t like is that you’re
sticking to your guns,
but you don’t even listen
to the argument...
I have listened,
I disagree with you.
..that there’s a different way
of dealing with this virus.
I completely disagree with you.
Can I make the point — lives.
Notjust lives in this
country, lives around
the world, globally, lives.
We need to save those lives.
We need to make sure 160 million
people don’t starve to death.
That’s really important.
I am following Anna’s question.
I am a lecturer at college
and exactly what Anna said in terms
of after two weeks isolation,
we could end up in the same vote.
My issue is, how long
are we going to play catch up?
It is notjust education,
it is the NHS and it
is also the economy.
Everything was just shut down and we
are still not at full capacity,
when will we ever get there?
We will constantly be on that
wheel, playing catch up.
Peter.
Hi there.
This question is for Sunetra,
because she is an epidemiologist
and a specialist.
I do kind of admire her more relaxed
approach, although would she say
the sort of preconditions that have
perhaps facilitated the growth
and creation of this virus,
in terms of degradation
of the environment and pollution
etc, do you think that there
is something in the future that
could cause much more damage,
if we aren’t protecting
the environment as much
I’m going to move around
the audience as quickly as I can.
Carol.
I work in a pharmacy and just this
week they have introduced the flu
vaccination for the over 655.
It has been extremely popular.
People in general are so frightened
ofjust becoming ill
and being vulnerable.
Not only to Covid, but to flu
and the condition it can cause,
especially for those
with underlying conditions.
Patients are just not getting
access to the doctors.
There are services we would
normally take for granted.
We are very lucky with the NHS.
There are still a lot of loopholes
where the NHS are not filling them.
Six weeks for an appointment
for someone who is feeling very
stressed or depressed or has
an underlying condition,
because of something
they are already suffering from,
diabetes and asthma for example,
heart conditions, they have just not
been able to get access to normal
NHS care, and if they do
get the coronavirus,
they feel like they are going
to be lost.
0K, Tuesday.
My question is, with winter
approaching, what is the
government’s coronavirus winter plan
and how will they facilitate
the NHS to cope with winter
pressures and a potential second
wave?
Nadhim, I am going to come to you,
Ijust want to hear one more,
from Matt.
My question was,
and there are a lot of
different opinions out there,
but what does the panel think of
Professor Whitty’s alleged comments
about two—week national lockdown?
There is lots of talk, Nadhim,
a two—week lockdown could be coming,
if we do not get the
infection rate down.
Is that likely?
Well, we have got the rule
of six now, which I
think it will make a difference,
as well as the local
interventions with Oldham and,
of course, the
north—east now and Leicester
and Manchester and other areas,
Birmingham and Solihull
in my part of the world.
One in seven people are living
under restrictions now.
If we all do the right thing
and this is where I think Tyra’s
question about herd immunity,
which the professor,
with all respect, what I have seen
in the data is a
big spike in those areas.
Notjust amongst the 17—
Ao—year—olds, which I
thinkJohn was referring
to, but it is actually
going further into
the
50 and 55 euros.
And we are beginning
to see, in other
countries, like Spain,
the hospital admissions
rise as well, so Tyra,
this idea of herd immunity is wrong.
The right thing to do is to make
sure that we all follow, you know,
hands, face, space and,
of course, the rule
of six, which is why
we
have introduced, both
the police and local
government have said to us,
we
want simplicity and straightforward
message to bring the prevalence
down.
The prevalence of the virus has shot
up, which is why we have
had to take this action
and I think if we do
the right thing, we want
to
avoid another national
lockdown and I would
like to think that we
would
not be in a national lockdown again
if we continue to do the right thing
and I implore everybody, I am sure
everyone would agree here, if we all
follow the rule of hands, face,
space, we will manage to make sure
that the second hump does
not actually happen.
Let’s just move off coronavirus
for a moment and take a
question from Matthew Eaton.
Thank you.
How has the Tories’ Brexit deal gone
from being "oven ready"
to "a threat to our economic
and political integrity"?
John Caudwell.
Thank you for that.
I don’t think that it was
first of all oven ready.
How would you have described it?
It was partially developed.
Partially frozen?
If you look at what Brussels
are doing, and I call them
the Brussels bully boys,
they were taking £8 billion
per year net off us,
they were benefiting by £80 billion
worth of trade benefit
in trading with Britain.
That is 80 billion better trade
for them than we were receiving.
They were then plundering our
fishing waters and all that
with the £8 billion.
Now, any commercial minded
businessmen on the planet would say,
yes, we would love to do a free
trade deal with Britain.
We would absolutely adore it!
Because we are going to gain
80 billion worth of trade deficit
and yet, they are bullying us
and beating us up.
They beat Theresa May black and blue
and they have continued trying to do
it all the way through.
Fortunately, Boris rose
to the challenge and fought
back and this behaviour
by Brussels I find
absolutely abhorrent.
L111:
But of course the reason they are
doing it is is because they have got
no option, because if they gave
Britain an easy ride, the other
European countries would see that
and potentially they would be an
exodus, possibly a mass exodus,
possibly a complete collapse of the
union and of course, that is not
what Brussels wants. They will use
what Bmssels wants. They will use
any means,
what Brussels wants. They will use
any means, fair or
any means, fair orfoul, to protect
any means, fair or foul, to protect
their
any means, fair orfoul, to protect
their situation and make it look to
any country that dares to want to
come out of the union, that they
will be crucified in the process.
Look what they have done just
recently, threatened to cut off all
Britain’s food supplies to Northern
Ireland. I mean, that is appalling!
jon Ashworth. I
Jon Ashworth. I mean it is curious,
jon Ashworth. I mean it is curious,
isn’t it, because
Jon Ashworth. I mean it is curious,
isn’t it, because Boris
isn’t it, because BorisJohnson told
isn’t it, because Boris johnson told
us he had
isn’t it, because BorisJohnson told
us he had an oven ready deal, he
insisted on having a general
election in order to get a mandate
for his deal and his deal went
through Parliament and we were lucky
through Partiament and we were lucky
enough to see a
through Parliament and we were lucky
enough to see a parade of ministers
on the television shows and in the
on the telavision shows and in the
studio is
on the television shows and in the
studio is telling us that Boris
johnson
Johnson had got this great deal and
johnson had got this great deal and
we
Johnson had got this great deal and
we should all celebrate, that Boris
johnson had
Johnson had confounded his critics,
johnson had confounded his critic,
as he said,
Johnson had confounded his critics,
as he said, because it was such a
brilliant deal. Now, six months down
the line, we are told that it isn’t
such a brilliant deal and it has to
be looked at again. Because they did
not understand, apparently, the
implications of the deal at time, or
they are either lying to us at the
time and now what they are doing is,
is by bringing forward these
particular measures in the way that
they affect the rundown and
they affect the mndown and
protocol,
they affect the rundown and
protocol, they are actually talking
about or admitting that they are
prepared to break international law!
That is a quite extraordinary
position by the United Kingdom to be
in, a country that helped create
international law and has always
been a proud nation on the global
stage, making the case for
international law and it has left us
in this rather sorry state and
potentially the next President of
the United States criticising us
last night on Twitter and I think,
why are they doing all of this? Why
why are they doing all of this? why
are they doing
why are they doing all of this? Why
are they doing it at this time, in
the midst of a global pandemic, we
ran have
can have disagreements about how we
ran have disagreements about how we
should
can have disagreements about how we
should respond to the pandemic but I
think we can all admit that it is a
think we ran all admit that it is a
pretty big
think we can all admit that it is a
pretty big issue that needs
undivided attention, why are they
doing this now when we need to be
getting on with dealing with that? A
lot of this has been misunderstood
about the negotiations from the
first day. You do not negotiate with
your hand behind your back. We
should have negotiated with Brussels
should have negotiated with Bmssels
on a tough
should have negotiated with Brussels
on a tough line right from the
beginning and we would have got this
done. Every single factor is
compelling why the EU is going to do
this deal with Britain on fair
terms. The only non—compelling
terms. The only non-compelling
factor is
terms. The only non—compelling
factor is the possible collapse of
the EU as every country starts to
think, do we really want to be part
of the shambles? It is that that is
because in the EU... Wisely you not
because in the EU... wisely you not
doing that, is it
because in the EU... Wisely you not
doing that, is it because the UK
Government is bad at negotiating?
The Conservative government were
dreadful. I used to put my head in
my hands in horror at the way we
were negotiating in Brussels. You do
were negotiating in Bmssels. You do
not negotiate
were negotiating in Brussels. You do
not negotiate with Belize by
rajoling
cajoling them and saying, please,
rajoling them and saying, please,
and ran you
cajoling them and saying, please,
and can you do this? You fight
and ran you do this? You fight
bullies
and can you do this? You fight
bullies with the only weapon they
understand and that is force and
that is what Boris has done. Now
they should be doing a deal with us
and saying, yes, you can have your
international fishery waters back,
what did they say? They said you can
what did they say? They said you ran
have your water
what did they say? They said you can
have your water is back, but you
will never export another piece of
fish to the whole of Europe if you
fish to the whola of Europe if you
do. It is
fish to the whole of Europe if you
do. It is disgusting. I am sure if
Michel Barnier was here and if
you’re watching, you can come on the
you’re watching, you ran come on the
programme, I
programme, lam
you’re watching, you can come on the
programme, lam sure
programme, I am sure that they would
deny they were acting as bully boys.
Let us hear from
Let us hearfrom our audience.
Let us hear from our audience.
Nathan.
Let us hearfrom our audience.
Nathan. Yes. If
Nathan. Yes. IfI
Let us hearfrom our audience.
Nathan. Yes. If I may ask, based on
Nathan. Yes. IfI may ask, based on
the government
Nathan. Yes. If I may ask, based on
the government admitting that they
are willing to break international
law, why should they expect the rest
of us to follow the laws that they
said via Twitter, for instance, if I
do not wear a face mask on the
train, is that
train, is thatjust a specific and
train, is that just a specific and
limited way
train, is thatjust a specific and
limited way of breaking the law and
therefore it is OK by the
government? Nile. I
government? Nile. Iwanted
therefore it is OK by the
government? Nile. I wanted to
government? Nila. Iwanted to
clarify why
government? Nile. I wanted to
clarify why Boris was seen as
fighting back in Brussels when
instead he is now implementing
something which would involve
breaking international law is to
bypass the agreement, because that
does not seem like he is winning if
he is having to fall back to
something that affects us breaking
the law. None of us here can
the law. None of us here ran
condone...
the law. None of us here can
condone... Let me hear
condone... Let me hearfrom the
condone... Let me hear from the
audience. It
condone... Let me hearfrom the
audience. It is Question Time.
Michael. I think it is a bit rich
from john
from John Caldwell beating the party
from john Caldwell beating the party
political
from John Caldwell beating the party
politicaljohn when he is doing a
political john when he is doing a
great job of
politicaljohn when he is doing a
greatjob of doing that. Basically
great job of doing that. Basically
what is
greatjob of doing that. Basically
what is quite clear is that the
government, it is apparent for a no
deal exit what it takes and blaming
and bullying as
and bullying asJohn appears to be
and bullying as john appears to be
doing and
and bullying asJohn appears to be
doing and insulting Brussels isn’t
doing and insulting Bmssels isn’t
really going
doing and insulting Brussels isn’t
really going to work, I do not
think, it is not working at the
moment, is it? Does anyone support
but the government is doing? Katie.
You’re taking down your hand. 0K,
Katie, let us hear
Katie, let us hearfrom
You’re taking down your hand. 0K,
Katie, let us hear from you.
Katie, let us hearfrom you. I do
Katie, let us hear from you. I do
not support
Katie, let us hearfrom you. I do
not support them. There are plenty
of Brexiteers among you. Ian, let us
hear from you. I
hearfrom you. I think it is more of
hear from you. I think it is more of
an oven ready
hearfrom you. I think it is more of
an oven ready chicken stir—fry. I
an oven ready chicken stir-fry. I
cannot see
an oven ready chicken stir—fry. I
cannot see the way the economy is
rannot see the way the economy is
going at the
cannot see the way the economy is
going at the moment, if we have a no
deal, I
deal, Irannot
going at the moment, if we have a no
deal, I cannot see it being much
worse than it is now or what is to
come. 0K. Boris
come. 0K. BorisJohnson’s deal, the
come. 0K. Borisjohnson’s deal, the
question is, from
come. 0K. BorisJohnson’s deal, the
question is, from Matt, how has the
Brexit deal gone from being oven
ready to a threat to our economic
and political integrity? I want to
and political integrity? Iwantto
read
and political integrity? I want to
read something to you, this is a
huge success for Boris, I pay
tribute to all his hard work and
congratulate him for defying the
odds, this is a description of the
withdrawal agreement agreed by Boris
johnson. He
Johnson. He said that? Nay. I know.
johnson. He said that? May. I know.
How has gone a
Johnson. He said that? Nay. I know.
How has gone a huge success to no
longer a success at all? Matt, we
left the European Union with the
withdrawal agreement and the
Northern Irish protocol, within
that, especially on the Northern
Ireland Protocol, the eyes were not
dotted and the teas were not crossed
on both sides agreed that there
would be a Joint Committee to deal
would be a joint Committee to deal
with the
would be a Joint Committee to deal
with the details of that. Where we
with the details of that. where we
are today, we
with the details of that. Where we
are today, we are negotiating the
future arrangement between ourselves
and the EU and we have deliberately
not asked for a bespoke special unit
deal because the moment you asked
for something that has never been
written down before, the lawyers
have a field
have afield day and it will take
have a field day and it will take
forever
have afield day and it will take
forever to deliver. Lots of lawyers
are resigning. Let me finish this
point. We have asked for a day like
Canada, something the EU have done
before, like with Japan, from the
before, like with japan, from the
European
before, like with Japan, from the
European Union. We are negotiating
in good faith, it is not about us
actually not delivering on the
withdrawal agreement and the
Northern Irish protocol, it is about
how we deliver on those things. We
are investing in infrastructure, you
are investing in infrastmclure, you
have all
are investing in infrastructure, you
have all heard this week about the
point john
pointJohn was making about food, we
point john was making about food, we
are investing in
pointJohn was making about food, we
are investing in infrastructure in
Northern Ireland and the Northern
Ireland Secretary is putting £2
billion to get Stormont back
operational because we needed to do
that because of our commitment to
the withdrawal agreement.
No, no, Nadhim,
that is off the point.
How has it gone from being
a deal that you thought
was a huge SUCCESS...
I’m about to tell you.
..that you went to the country with,
to one that you now want to change?
No, I’m confident that
we will get a deal.
We’re negotiating in good faith.
Monsieur Barnier is also
negotiating in good faith.
And I think both
sides can get a deal.
0K.
What the Prime Minister has said is,
we can’t keep negotiating forever.
There are still significant gaps
on fishing and on what they call
level playing field —
ie, state subsidy.
Now, we’vejust announced a deal
with Japan, a really historic deal,
much bigger deal than we would have
had with Japan if we were
still part of the EU.
And there, again, we have announced
how we will deal with state subsidy,
which should reassure our European
friends as well.
So, I’m confident that we will get
a deal on the future if both sides
negotiate hard by October the 15th.
Beyond which, the Prime Minister
is right to say that businesses
around the country —
and I’m the Business and Industry
Minister — need certainty.
So, we need to make sure that
if we can’t get a deal
on the terms of Canada,
we’ll go for an Australia deal and
we will support our businesses...
Which is no—deal.
An Australia deal means no—deal.
Australia are on WTO terms.
Yes, which is no—deal.
It trades with the European Union.
I just wondered if you want
to answer Nathan’s point about...
Because we’ve heard the Northern
Ireland Secretary saying
not once, but twice —
and he should know because it’s
about the Northern
Ireland Protocol...
Yeah.
..that this is breaking the law
in a very specific and limited way.
Would you, as Nathan is suggesting,
sanction other law breaking
in a very specific and limited way —
say about the rule
of six, for example?
Well, the Withdrawal Agreement
does not, and the UK
Internal Market Bill does
not do that.
The clauses within it...
Hang on.
You’re saying it
doesn’t break the law?
No, hold on a second.
The Attorney General has
written to the committee,
the Select Committees responsible,
making it very clear
what the legal position is.
No, hang on.
So, just so we’re clear.
Yes.
The Northern Ireland Secretary
says it breaks the law.
Are you saying differently?
No, I’m not saying differently.
I’m saying to you exactly
what the Attorney General has
written to the Select Committees.
And the Northern Ireland
Secretary has said.
What I’m saying is that no
government can stand by and watch
a part of its country
and a community within its country,
Northern Ireland, be
harmed in any way.
That’s not what I’m
saying in this question.
These clauses, Nathan,
are an insurance policy.
We’ve added to them that
Parliament has to vote.
Parliament is sovereign.
Parliament have to vote
if the Government has to invoke them
to protect the peace process
and the communities
of Northern Ireland.
Because what we can’t do,
toJohn Caudwell’s point,
is have a situation where an extreme
interpretation of the Northern Irish
protocol would actually stop us
from sending food...
65% of our trade with
Northern Ireland is with GB.
0K.
That’s actually not what Nathan
was asking, so let me just
hear a bit more from...
That’s not what Nathan’s question...
The peace process...
But that wasn’t his question!
Yes, I...
I know you want to talk,
but that wasn’t his question!
I’m answering his question.
No, his question was,
very specifically, given
that the Government is breaking
the law in a specific and limited
way, is it OK for everyone else?
I’m saying, Nathan, you can’t
extrapolate in that way
because you can’t watch a part
of your country he harmed
and the peace process be
harmed and be a bystander.
0K, we hearyou.
The reason for these clauses
are they’re an insurance policy.
Charlotte, let’s hear from you.
Yeah, so the panel are talking
about breaking the law.
If these negotiations don’t go well,
it’ll be the case that UK law
enforcement loses access to really
crucial European crime systems.
This is a real concern for everybody
in the law enforcement community.
I don’t know what the panel think
about that, but the way
the negotiations are deteriorating,
this is looking more
and more likely.
The workarounds are
really not efficient.
Zainab, you had your
hand up a moment ago.
Hi.
Yeah, I just want to follow
on from Nathan’s question.
Is it not hypocritical
that the Government is advising
the nation to report their neighbour
for breaking the law,
however, the Government
themselves intend to breach
the rule of law?
0K.
Nicci...
I’ll come back to you, John.
Nicci, you’re smiling at that.
I am smiling at that,
and at the previous
question about lawbreaking.
I mean, the rule of six is quite
interesting because the rule of six
feels like it’s clear,
and then you know that
people are going to pubs,
going to restaurants.
They’re stomping around
on moors, dressed in
britches, shooting grouse.
Well, Nicci, let’s come back
to Matthew’s question,
though, which was about...
Well, let’s come back to Matthew’s
question, which is about,
"How has the Tories’ Brexit deal
gone from being oven—ready
to a threat to our economic
and political integrity?"
Those are Matt’s words.
My view on that is that I ardently
wanted to remain in Europe,
and I think I’ll be sad
until the day I die
that we’re leaving.
But I’ve completely accepted that
52% of the country voted to leave.
But 52% of the country did not vote
to leave in a kind of chaotic,
disastrous way that’s also driving
the country mad with
boredom, I think.
We seem to be locked into this
terrifyingly pedantic
conversation about minutiae —
which is very important,
but it makes most of us
lose the will to live,
I’d say.
Can I come back on that?
0K, let me bring Sunetra in,
she’s not talked about it.
I will let you come back in.
Sunetra.
What are my views?
Are you losing the will to live?
Well, I’m just thinking that
here are two shambles.
There’s the way this
pandemic has been dealt
with and there’s the way Brexit
is being, is unfolding.
And in both cases, I’m worried
about the economically vulnerable.
I think in both cases,
we need to identify...
I agree, I don’t want to...
In many cases, in this case,
I don’t have the qualifications
to dwell on the niceties.
What I want to see
is that we identify
the vulnerable and protect them.
And I think that should
be ourfundamental goal.
And that is where we should invest.
Jon, you’re dying to come in.
Yeah, I really think the points that
Nathan and Zainab have made,
they really are quite important.
And I know, you know, I have
sympathy for you as a Minister
because you may find them slightly
frustrating questions, but...
the actions of governments
and the actions of ministers
have consequences.
And we’re in the midst of a crisis.
We’re asking the British people
to make immense sacrifices —
the rule of six, in Oldham,
in Leicester, now in
Newcastle and Sunderland,
not going into other people’s
houses, not seeing your family
members in private gardens.
I think the sacrifices, I think
these restrictions are warranted.
Probably disagree with colleagues
here, but I agree with
the Government that these
restrictions are necessary to try
and bring infections down.
I think we also need to sort
out test and tracing.
Sorry for being party
political, but it is
a shambles and needs fixing.
But at the same time,
you’re asking people
to follow the law —
face masks, rule of six,
not going into other houses —
and you’re actually completely
admitting that you’re going to be
breaking international law.
So, do you not appreciate that
when we’re in a pandemic and we’re
asking people to follow so many
different restrictions and rules,
that the very least the Government
should do is follow
the law themselves?
Can I come back on this point
to Zainab and Nathan?
Zainab, Parliament will
make that decision.
Parliament is sovereign.
Why do I say that to you?
Because actually, the German
Parliament, at times,
has actually taken votes that move
away from international agreements
within Europe because they deem it
unconstitutional to their country.
The Canadian Parliament has actually
voted on things where they’ve signed
international treaties,
but they’ve moved away from it
in domestic lawmaking.
So, the same thing will happen
here in our Parliament.
We’re not saying this will happen.
All we’re doing is saying
we need the safeguards,
an insurance policy,
that we can’t allow one part
of the United Kingdom —
Northern Ireland, the communities
of Northern Ireland —
to be harmed in any way by some
extreme interpretation
of the Northern Irish Protocol.
We will bring it back to Parliament,
to trigger those clauses —
if we need to — to protect
the unfettered access of
Northern Ireland to Great Britain.
That is already,
by the way, respected
in the Withdrawal Agreement.
So, this has precedent
internationally.
And I think it would be wrong
and unfair to extrapolate that
to breaking the rule of six
or to breaking any other
rules in our country.
So, that is all I would say
to you, Zainab and Nathan.
0K.
Peter.
Yeah, I don’t condone
breaking international law,
although states do it quite often.
I think a really dangerous thing
in the future, being a Brexiteer,
is that due to trade deals —
say, the one with Japan,
which I think is really impressive,
I think it’s great —
in the future, will states be
looking to make deals with us,
in case they’re worried we might
renege on it or pull back?
And I’m saying this as a Brexiteer.
I just don’t think it’s
great going forward,
that states might think,
well, they had an agreement here,
they might go back with us.
That may sort of harm future
relations worldwide.
I don’t know what everyone thinks
about that, but I think it’s quite
an interesting view for the future.
But, Peter, people can see
that we are doing it in the extreme
case that the interpretation harms
Northern Ireland.
0K.
Nadhim, you have said that.
Ijust need to hear
from the audience.
You have said that repeatedly.
Japan agreed a deal with us
because they see the benefits
of a deal with the United Kingdom,
which I think you were
referring to earlier.
Katie.
50, Northern towns like Oldham
are already disproportionately
affected by coronavirus,
and I think we’re also going to be
disproportionately affected
by a no—deal Brexit.
We were on holiday in Copenhagen
last year and we were talking
to people there and they said,
look, we never have a
majority government.
Anytime anyone wants
to form a government here,
people need to sit down
and they need to
negotiate each other.
And they were absolutely
flabbergasted that our UK Government
doesn’t seem to understand
what negotiation is.
It’s not standing there and shouting
at the foreigners, you know?
You need to sit round the table
and negotiate properly.
Otherwise, do you know
who’s going to lose?
It’s not going to be
London, it’s going to be
Northern towns like Oldham.
And, Matt, you asked the question.
Erm, yeah, sorry.
It was just to go back
to the point of, yeah,
it said it was oven—ready,
but Nadhim said that Is needed to be
dotted and Ts crossed.
So, it was never oven—ready.
When the UK came out of the shared
customs territories,
it was always going to be that
Northern Ireland was
going to be different.
It is part of the UK,
but it’s the only part
of the UK with a [and border.
So, we knew that this
was going to happen.
So, it was just another example
of the Government spinning
and basicallyjust lying
to us again.
0K.
There’s more of you have
got your hands up and I’d
love to come to you,
but I’m afraid our time is up.
Thank you, all our questioners
from the Oldham area tonight.
It was great to hear from you.
Next week, we’ll have a virtual
audience again, of course,
and we will be coming from
Chingford.
In and around Chingford.
And on the panel, we’ll bejoined
by comedian Shappi Khorsandi,
and the newly—elected leader
of the Liberal Democrats.
So, do get in touch with us
if you’d like to be part
of our virtual audience.
We’d love to hear from you.
You’re a key part of the programme,
so do get in touch.
And you can do that
at the Question Time website.
There’s an online form
and you can fill it in.
And then Adrian Chiles, as always,
is coming up on Radio 5 Live
with Question Time Extra Time.
You can see on the screen how
to get in touch by phone,
by text or by tweet.
But for now, thank you very much
to my panel for coming in.
Our first show after the summer.
Great to get started.
Thank you all very
much for coming on.
And Nicci, of course, forjoining us
from Suffolk, I think.
So, thank you forjoining
us down the line.
And of course, thank
you to you at home for watching.
From Question Time, bye—bye.
APPLAUSE
I wash my hands
to protect my family.
I wear a face covering
to protect my mates.
I make space to protect my nan.
Hands. Face. Space.
I wash my hands to
protect my colleagues.
I wear a face covering
to protect strangers.
I make space to protect you.
Hands. Face. Space.
As we spend more time indoors,
we need to do whatever we can
to help protect each other,
so please, wash hands,
cover face, make space.
I have called upJeremy Hunt to help
us out with this episode.
Hello, Jeremy.
Hi.
Now, obviously you are a former
Health Secretary, but your last big
job in the Cabinet was Foreign
Secretary.
So I thought I would combine that
with some of the news today,
which is that Guadalupe has been
taken off the travel corridors list,
so people from Guadalupe have
to quarantine when they arrive
in the UK.
So, I am going to give
you a little Guadalupe quiz,
as a former Foreign Secretary.
Go on, try me!
Try me.
It is just for fun.
Question one.
Guadalupe’s nearest neighbour
is a British territory, called...?
Saint Lucia?
Montserrat.
The flight to Guadalupe leaving
London tomorrow at 6:20am
via Paris takes how long?
Is it nine hours, 13
hours or 25 hours?
I would guess 13 hours.
Correct!
The prize is not a flight
or a ticket on that
flight, just to warn you.
Last question, and this
is my favourite, because it touches
on many of my interests,
Guadalupe uses the euro
and is in the customs
territory of the EU.
True orfalse?
True.
Correct!
Because it is a
department of France.
It looks like you used your time
in the Foreign Office very wisely
to just sort of read up on all sorts
of interesting places.
Yes.
I wish I had sorted Brexit
as well, but there you are.
Well, Jeremy, we did notjust
get you on as a former
Foreign Secretary, we got
you on because you are now the chair
of the Health Select Committee
in the House of Commons,
which means there is lots we can
talk to you about on this
edition of Newscast.
Newscast.
Newscast, from the BBC.
Hello, it is Adam in the studio.
And Laura in the same
studio, two metres apart.
And James Gallagher,
halfway across London,
in a completely different studio
on his own.
James Gallagher, our health
correspondent there,
and we are joined by a special guest
for the whole show,
it is Jeremy Hunt.
Hello, Jeremy.
Hi, thank you for making me feel
like a pariah politician,
all in a studio, all on my own.
Don’t worry, that is
Chris Mason’s seat,
so you are in illustrious company.
You are also very trusting,
because you told us just before
we started chatting tonight that
you have never seen or listened
to the programme before.
0h, indeed.
I am a Newscast virgin.
Yes.
There we go.
Well, more of that to come.
Always remember your first time.
Now, we have got you
on because you are chair
of the Health Select Committee
in the House of Commons,
you are a former Foreign Secretary,
a former Health Secretary,
so you can talk us through lots
of the things that are happening
and the big thing that seems to be
happening now is the test
and trace system seems to be
under a lot of strain.
I think everyone knows somebody
or knows somebody who knows somebody
who has had a problem
getting a test.
I think that is absolutely right
and, you know, let’s remember,
there was not a testing system
at the very start of this,
now there is a very,
very big testing system,
and there are lots of teething
problems with getting that sorted,
but it is really clear,
in the last week or so,
the level of stress and strain
and frustration that has been around
the testing system has
been absolutely intense.
MPs have all been completely swamped
with complaints about it,
we have seen the public hearing,
public frustration, people really
perplexed by what is going on.
And listen to the frustration
from Rosa, who is a nurse,
and, like many people,
she is waiting for a test
for a member of herfamily,
which means she cannot go and work,
in her case, in the health service.
I am a respiratory specialist nurse
and I work in a team of about ten
and we assess patients who have come
into hospital via A&E
or in the acute medical areas,
who have breathing difficulties.
And we do sometimes see Covid
patients through that.
At the moment, five people
in the team are off,
due to their children being poorly
or sent home from school or nursery
with a fever or a cough
and we cannot help our colleagues
at hospital because we
are self isolating.
We cannot get swabs for our kids.
We are trying through
the government website,
through health at work.
It has been difficult,
our colleagues are overstretched,
tired, busy, and we want
to help them.
I just think this is a catastrophic
failure, I need to be at work
at the moment and I am not there.
One of the problems
about the government’s
handling about this is,
it has not only showed,
shall we say, much empathy
for people who are stuck
in the system and today the Leader
of the House of Commons said that
people complaining about testing
were carping on.
0h, Jeremy Hunt, what do you think
about your colleague
Jacob Rees—Mogg saying that?
Well, I would not have used those
words and I think Rosa
is a very good example
of two issues, actually.